# Population genomics of Culex pipiens from Southwestern Spain
## Part 1: Sequences processing and mapping
### Sonia Cebrian-Camison 

Please, note that during analyses of this project, I worked in three different servers. Some had job management systems (SLURM) and some others not. Also, some of the software used were installed in conda environments, while others were installed globally. The scripts and other code shown here may reflect these differences.
* Servers: CESGA, Talapas, Poppy
* Conda environments: culex, vcf, earlgrey
* Programs used:
  * multiqc v1.26
  * fastqc v0.12
  * fastp v0.24
  * bwa v0.7.18
  * samtools v1.18
  * picard v3.4.0
  * qualimap v2.3
  * mosdepth v0.3.8

### 1: Fastp trimming
(culex - CESGA and talapas)
First, I did quality control of raw reads using fastqc and multiqc to decide which filters to apply with fastp. After applying fastp, I re-did fastqc and multiqc to ensure everything looked good.

1. [fastqc.sh](../scripts/fastqc.sh): runs fastqc in all files and then do multiqc over the results. I do it before and after applying fastp to
2.  [list-array-fastp.sh](../scripts/list-array-fastp.sh): it creates a list ready to run fastp as a job array on many files within a directory
3. [fastp-array.sh](../scripts/fastp-array.sh): runs fastp as a job array using all the files contained in a list

Main fastp commands used:
```bash
    --trim_poly_g \
    --trim_poly_x \
    --length_required 30 \
    --correction \
    --detect_adapter_for_pe #\
   --adapter_fasta /mnt/lustre/scratch/nlsas/home/csic/dbl/scc/data/polyG.fasta
``` 
Second round of fastqc was done directly:
```bash
fastqc $LUSTRE/3.repetidas/data/*.fastp.fq.gz -o $LUSTRE/3.repetidas/fastqc
```

### 2. alignment and indexing
(culex - talapas)

Reference genome weas cut to retain only data on 3 main chromosomes
and I renamed the chromosomes to 1, 2 y 3
```bash
cd data
samtools faidx idCulPipi1.1.primary.fa SUPER_2 > idCulPipi.chrom.fa
samtools faidx idCulPipi1.1.primary.fa SUPER_3 >> idCulPipi.chrom.fa
samtools faidx idCulPipi1.1.primary.fa SUPER_1 >> idCulPipi.chrom.fa

sed 's/^>SUPER_2$/>2/' idCulPipi.chrom.fa > idCulPipi.chrom2.fa
sed 's/^>SUPER_3$/>3/' idCulPipi.chrom2.fa > idCulPipi.chrom3.fa
sed 's/^>SUPER_1$/>1/' idCulPipi.chrom3.fa > idCulPipi.chrom4.fa
#rm all except chrom4 and rename it to the original idCulPipi.chrom.fa
```
Then was indexed using  
```bash
bwa index data/idCulPipi.chrom.fa
samtools faidx data/idCulPipi.chrom.fa
samtools dict data/idCulPipi.chrom.fa -o data/idCulPipi.chrom.dict
```

Alignment was done with **bwa mem** using only paired end reads. Then bams were sorted using **samtools sort** and indexed using **samtools index**. We added read groups with **picard AddOrReplaceReadGroups**.
* Sequencing batches 1 to 3: alignment were done separetely from indexing, sorting and adding read groups.
    * [bwa-align-array.sh](../scripts/bwa-align-array.sh): get paired ends files and align. Need a list of samples as input to run as an array. Column 1 is taskid, column 2 is the name of the sample.
    * [index-bam-array.sh](../scripts/index-bam-array.sh): takes the list of samples and index the bams, adding read groups and sorting them first. The list of samples need to have columns with sample id, lane, read (R1 or R2) and extension (fastp.fq.gz). 

* Batch 4: alignment and indexing were done in a single step:
    * [list-align-index.sh](../scripts/list-align-index.sh): creates a list of samples with all the info needed to run the alignment and indexing. Similar as the list created for indexing in previous batches, but in this case is used to run both steps together.
    * [align-bams-index.sh](../scripts/align-bams-index.sh): runs the alignment and indexing of the bams. It also generates flagstat reports for each sample. The parameters used are the same that for the rest of the batches.

Finally, I used [flagstat-summary.sh](../scripts/flagstat-summary.sh) to generates a summary report with the flagstat results of all the samples in a single file. I also extracted a list of samples that had less than 60% of properly mapped reads.
```bash
awk -F'\t' 'NR==1 || ($6 < 60)' summary.txt > below60-properly-mapped.txt
```
This samples were not excluded yet, but the imformation was taking into acount. Further in the analyses, none of those samples passed variant filtering steps, so they were excluded from the final dataset.

### 3. Mark duplicates 
(vcf - talapas)
Removing of duplicates was done using **picard MarkDuplicates** with the option *REMOVE_DUPLICATES=true*.
[mark-duplicates-array.sh](../scripts/mark-duplicates-array.sh) takes the list of samples works as an array eliminating all the duplicates from each file. As we are working with different runs (lanes) from the same samples that we are later going to merge, is better to erase all the duplicates instead of just marking them. Need to do *mkdir mark-duplicates* to run the script
List of samples is the same one generated previoulsy for indexing.

We used the output summary files generated for each sample to create a general summary to quickly check the percentage of duplications in each sample.
```bash
for file in /path/to/1.noviembre/mark-duplicates/*_marked_dup_metrics.txt; do
    sample=$(basename "$file" | sed 's/_marked_dup_metrics.txt//')
    percent_dup=$(awk '/PERCENT_DUPLICATION/ {getline; print $9}' "$file")
    echo -e "${sample}\t${percent_dup}" >> 1.noviembre/mark-duplicates/duplicates-summary-1nov.txt
done
```
After this we indexed all samples
```bash
for bam in ./*bam ; do echo "indexing $bam"; samtools index $bam; done
```

### 4. Merge sequencing runs from same sample
(culex - talapas)
We use 2 scripts:
* [list-to-merge-bams.sh](scripts/../list-to-merge-bams.sh) : generates a list of samples with only PP**** codes, so can be used in future steps that only need to identify samples. This list need to have info separated for sample id and lane.
* [merge-bams-array.sh](scripts/../merge-bams-array.sh): merge all the indexed bams correspondign to the same sample-

Then merged files should be indexing
```bash
for bam_file in 3.repetidas/merged/*.bam; do
    echo "Indexing BAM file: $bam_file"
    samtools index "$bam_file"
done
```
**Validation of merged bams**
We used [validate-merged.sh](scripts/../validate-merged.sh) (culex - poppy) to check that the merging process was done correctly. It uses picard *ValidateSamFile I="$bam" MODE=SUMMARY*.

### 5.Quality checks of final bams:
(culex - talapas or poppy) 

First, we did a check re-running *piccard MarkDuplicates* to make sure new duplicates were not created during the merging process. Then, we used *qualimaps* + *multi-bamqc* to check mapping quality and other metrics. Finally, we calculated coverage along the genome using *mosdepth*.


**1. qualimaps + multibamqc** 
First I did qualimaps of every sample with [qualimap.sh](../scripts/qualimap.sh) and then did *qualimap multi-bamqc*. We added information about the batch of sequencing each sample belonged to in the config file used for multibamqc.

```bash
#create multibamqc config file
find /path/to/3.repetidas/qualimaps -mindepth 1 -maxdepth 1 -type d | awk -F/ '{print $NF "\t" $0 "\t3.repetidas"}' > multibamqc_config_file.txt
find /path/to/2.mayo/qualimaps -mindepth 1 -maxdepth 1 -type d | awk -F/ '{print $NF "\t" $0 "\t2.mayo"}' >> multibamqc_config_file.txt
find /path/to/1.noviembre/qualimaps -mindepth 1 -maxdepth 1 -type d | awk -F/ '{print $NF "\t" $0 "\t1.noviembre"}' >> multibamqc_config_file.txt
find /path/to/4.enero/qualimaps -mindepth 1 -maxdepth 1 -type d | awk -F/ '{print $NF "\t" $0 "\t4.enero"}' >> multibamqc_config_file.txt

#run multibamqc
qualimap multi-bamqc -d multibamqc/multibamqc_config_file.txt -outdir "./multibamqc" -outfile "pipiens_1234batch_multibamqc_report.pdf" -outformat PDF:HTML
```
**2. check the coverage along the genome**
We calculated coverage along the genome by using *mosdepth*
```bash
for bam in *.bam; do
echo "checking coverage for $bam"
mosdepth --by 100000 ${bam%.bam} $bam
done
```
Then, we used an R script to plot coverage results [mosdepth-coverage.R](../scripts/mosdepth-coverage.R) 


#### Mitochondrial phylogenetic reconstruction
We reconstructed phylogenies using mitochondrial genomes to confirm species identity.

The protocol used is the same as followed for perexiguus, which is explained in [3.Mitochondrial_tree](../perexiguus_popgen/3.Mitochondrial_tree.md).

