# Population genomics of Culex pipiens from Southwestern Spain
## Part 3: Population structure analyses
### Sonia Cebrian-Camison 

* Servers: Poppy
* Conda environments: culex, vcf
* Programs used:
  * PLINK v1.9
  * R v4.2.2
  * ADMIXTURE v1.3.0
  * bcftools v1.19
  * SNPrelate R package v1.40.0
  * GWASTools R package v1.52.0
  * GENESIS R package v2.36.0
  * SRA toolkit v3.2.1
  * ggplot2 R package v3.5.1

### 1. Population structure analyses
#### 1.1. Linkage disequilibrium prunning and PCA
 and conventional PCA (culex env on talapas)

In order to perform PCA analyses, first I did linkage disequilibrium prunning to remove SNPs in high LD. I used PLINK. Sometimes it gave back an error caused by some contains on the FORMAT field of the vcf/bcf files. To avoid this, I first removed all FORMAT fields other than GT.

```bash
# first let only GT in format so plink dont freak out
bcftools annotate -x ^FORMAT/GT pipiens123_1_1nBDQF_M.bcf -Oz -o pipiens123_1_filteredGT.vcf.gz
tabix -p vcf stripped.vcf.gz
```
Then I run  [ld-prunning2.sh](../scripts/ld-prunning2.sh). This script prune out SNPs under linkage desequilibrium, recode new vcf without the prunned out sites and then use this new vcf to perform a PCA. I set *--indep-pairwise 50 10 0.5*.

Then I plot the PCA results using ggplot2. The specific code is not included as it is very standard yet very dependent on the specific dataset and the desired aesthetics. I plot based on localities, provinces, habitat (urban vs natural), ecotype (see [ecotype analyses](4.ecotype_identification_and_variation_analyses.md)) and sex. 

#### 1.2. PCA accounting for highly related individuals
We used the *.bim, .bed* and *.fam* files generated by PLINK to run a PCA accounting for relatedness using [PCA-relatedness.R](../scripts/PCA-relatedness.R). We set the kinship coefficient treshold at 0.125.

#### 1.3. Admixture analyses
We run admixture analyses using ADMIXTURE
```bash
for k in {1..8}; do
    echo "running admixture for K=${k}"
    admixture --cv ../$PCA_bedfile ${k} \
        > wholegen_log${k}.out
done
```
And plot results in ggplot2 in Rstudio.

### 2. Ecotype identification
#### 2.1. Download and process data from Haba et al., 2025
In order to identify the ecotype of our samples, we downloaded raw sequences from *Cx. pipiens pipiens* and *Cx. pipiens molestus* from [Haba *et al*. (2025)](https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.ady4515) . We used *prefetch* from SRA toolkit to download the data from NCBI SRA and *fasterq-dump* to convert .sra files to fastq files.
A complete list of samples used will be provided hete upon acceptance of the manuscript.

#### 2.2 Mapping and variant calling
The samples from Haba et al., 2025 were processed using the same pipeline for [mapping](1.sequence_processing_and_mapping.md) and [variant calling](2.variant_calling_and_filtering.md) as ours. The only changes to take into consideration:

* Paths to samples and name of files in the scripts were changed as needed.
* A second run of fastp was done using [fastp2-molestus.sh](../scripts/fastp2-molestus.sh) in order to remove overrepresented sequences
```bash
 >overrep1
CTTAAATTCTTAAATTCTTAAATTCTTAAATTCTTAAATTCT
>overrep2
GAATTTAAGAATTTAGAATTTAAGAATTTAGAATTTAAGA)
```
* Variant calling was done sepparetlely for Haba et al. (2025) samples, and the resulting bcf files were merged to ours after filtering repeats using bcftools *merge*.

```bash
bcftools merge -Ob --threads 4 -o pip1234-mol_3_norep.bcf pipiens1234_3_norep_sorted.bcf molestus_mcbride_3_norep_sorted.bcf
```
The rest of the filtering steps were the same as for our samples (see [2.variant_calling_and_filtering.md](2.variant_calling_and_filtering.md)).

#### 2.3. Ecotype identification and gene flow
We performed LD prunning and PCA in the same way as for our samples. We plotted the results and compared the grouping of our samples with those from Haba et al., 2025 in order to identify the ecotype of ours. The 2 clusters identified by admixture analyses also corresponded perfectly with the 2 groups identified as different ecotypes.
12 samples showed intermediate probabilities of belonging to either cluster (40-60%), suggesting they could be hybrids between *Cx. pipiens pipiens* and *Cx. pipiens molestus*, so they were left as unassigned (see 4).
