# Population genomics of Culex pipiens from Southwestern Spain
## Part 5: Ecotype identification 
### Sonia Cebrian-Camison

* Servers: Poppy
* Conda environments: f3r
* Programs used:
  * PLINK v1.9
  * R v4.2.2
  * pixy v2.0.0.beta12
  * ggplot2 R package v3.5.1
  * ggtree R package v3.15.0
  * ADMIXTOOLS v7.0.1
  * bcftools v1.19
  * fastreeR v2.0.0
 

### 1. f3 metrics
(poppy - f3r)
To further explore the possibility of admixture between ecotypes, we performed f3 statistics using [qp3Pop](https://uqrmaie1.github.io/admixtools/reference/qp3pop.html)  from ADMIXTOOLS. The main objective of this analyses is to test whether the group of samples with intermediate ecotype ancestry (40-60% from admixture analyses; see [3.Population_structure_analyses.md](3.Population_structure_analyses.md)) show signals of admixture between *Cx. pipiens pipiens* and *Cx. pipiens molestus*.

 We run the analysis using only chromosome 2, as it has no known chromosomic inversions, and the reduced dataset of 90 samples (see [2.Variant_calling_and_filtering.md](2.Variant_calling_and_filtering.md)) We pruned the data for LD setting *--indep-pairwise 200 10 0.2*

I then created ecot60-pipiens-f3.eigenstrat.ind file that assign each sample to one group. Groups were defined as *pipiens*, *molestus* and *unassigned* (samples with ecotype ancestry between 40-60% from admixture analyses). The file looked like this:
```
PP1001 U molestus
PP1004 U molestus
PP1016 U molestus
PP1028 U pipiens
PP1033 U pipiens
[...]
```
Where the first column is the sample ID, the second column is a used for sex (not used) and the third column is the group assignment.

For f3 calculations, first, I created a parameter file (par.PLINK2EIGEN) for *convertf*:
```txt
genotypename:   samples.bed
snpname:        samples.bim
indivname:      samples.fam
outputformat:   EIGENSTRAT
genotypeoutname: samples.eigenstrat.geno
snpoutname:      samples.eigenstrat.snp
indoutname:      samples.eigenstrat.ind
familynames:     NO
```
Then, I converted the plink files to eigenstrat format:
```bash
convertf -p par.PLINK2EIGEN
```
This generates the three required EIGENSTRAT files:
*.eigenstrat.geno
*.eigenstrat.snp

Then, we definide the populations we want to check in *trios.txt*:
```txt
molestus pipiens unassigned
pipiens unassigned molestus
unassigned molestus pipiens
```
The format of this file is:
target  source1  source2

So, for each line, *qp3Pop* will compute *f₃(target; source1, source2)*.

Finally, I created a parameter file for *qp3Pop* (par.f3):
```txt
genotypename: chr2_pip_f3_strict.eigenstrat.geno
snpname:      chr2_pip_f3_strict.eigenstrat.snp
indivname:    ecot60-pipiens-f3.eigenstrat.ind
popfilename:  trios.txt
inbreed:      YES
numthreads:   8
```
and we run *qp3Pop*:
```bash
qp3Pop -p par.qp3pop.2ecot60 > qp3pop.2ecot60.out 2> qp3pop.2ecot60.err
```
### 2. Pixy analyses
From the same 90 samples we calculated diversity and divergence using pixy:

* Nucleotide diversity (π), Dxy and Fst were calculated using [pixy-ecotipes.sh](../scripts/pixy-ecotypes.sh) 
* Da was calculated using [calculate-Da.sh](../scripts/pixy-ecotypes-da.sh)

All statistics were calculated ar 10 anf 5kb windows (--window_size). They were also calculated twice with different population assignments.
* FFirst, we grouped samples in genotypes with a treshold of >95% of ecotype ancestry, leaving the rest as unassigned to any ecotype.
* Then, we grouped ecotype with a treshold of >60%, setting as unassigned samples with ecotype ancestry between 40-60% from admixture analyses.

This allowed us to explore the robustness of genomic patterns to ecotype definition.

### 3. Phylogenetic reconstruction
We used fastreeR to reconstruct a phylogenetic tree based on the VCF file of chromosome 2. We used the same reduced dataset of 90. 

We first filtered the bcf using [filt_bcf_4trees.sh](../scripts/filt_bcf_4trees.sh). That script:
* retains biallelic SNPPs
* uses  _bcftools +prune_ to retain one variant per 1kbp among these SNPs
* retain only the variant with highest allele frequency from each of the windows

Then we run fastreeR
```bash 
#!/bin/bash
work=/path/to/workdir
invcf=$work/$input
out=$work/$output

zcat $invcf | \
    fastreeR VCF2TREE -i - -o $out
```
and plotted the tree using ggtree in Rstudio.
