# Population genomics of Culex pipiens from Southwestern Spain
## Part 7: Characterization of WOlbachia infection
### Sonia Cebrian-Camison 

### 1: competitive mapping
To determine if our samples were infected by _Wolbachia_ we performed competitive mapping.
I downloaded wPip reference genome from  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NC_010981.1/ and add it to the Cx pipiens reference (adding prefixes to scaffold so they can be identified)
```bash
(
  # Wolbachia
  awk '/^>/{split(substr($0,2),a," "); print ">WB_" a[1]; next}{print}' Wolbachia_NC_010981.1.fasta
  # Culex
  awk '/^>/{print ">CP_" substr($0,2); next}{print}' idCulPipi1.1.renamed.fa
) > wolbachia_pipiens.fa

# indixes
bwa index data/wolbachia_pipiens.fa
samtools faidx data/wolbachia_pipiens.fa
samtools dict data/wolbachia_pipiens.fa -o data/wolbachia_pipiens.dict
```

Now i have to redo all the pipeline for mapping, indexing and sort bam files and remove duplicates. Then I merged bam files belonging to different sequencing runs but same sample and sort them again.
The methods and parameters used for this were the same as previously used for Cx pipiens samples ([1.sequence_processing_and_mapping](1.sequence_processing_and_mapping.md). The only changes made to the scripts were for:
1. run in a server without SLURM 
2. input, output names and paths to directoies.

### 2. quantification of Wb infection
First, extract reads only mapped to wPip.
```bash
#!/bin/bash
 
for bam in merged/*bam; do
    echo "Processing $bam"
    sample=$(basename "$bam" .merged.sorted.bam)
    echo "Sample name: $sample"
    samtools view -b "$bam" "WB_NC_010981.1" > Wb-bams12/"${sample}"_Wb.bam
    samtools index Wb-bams12/"${sample}"_Wb.bam
done

```
Then we filtered to retain only reads that map at least 60% of their length against wPip genome
Ahora filtro pot 60%: me quedo solo con reads que mapeen al menos un 60% de su longitud contra wolbachia and only paired reads. FInally we obtained a summary stating the percentage of wPip genome covered by each Cx. pipiens samples. We considere all Cx.pipiens with reads covering more than 1% of wPip genome were infected by Wolbachia.

filterbam_alignment.py and coverage_summary.py  were kindly shared with us by Mylène Weill’s group at the University of Montpelier. 

## 3. Identification of wPip groups

To identify the group of wPip strains infecting our samples (wPIp-I to wPip-V), we did BLAST against reference sequences of pk1 marker
 from samples of known wPip groups.

Samples used:
Accession-number    -Strain -Reference
OM885005.1  wPip-I	(Atyame at al., 2011)
OM885006.1	wPip-III	(Atyame at al., 2011)
OM885007.1	wPip-II	(Atyame at al., 2011)
OM885008.1	wPip-IV	(Atyame at al., 2011)
OM885009.1	wPip-V	(Atyame at al., 2011)
LC106155.1	wPip-I	(de Pinho Mixão et al., 2016)
OQ223315.1	wPip-II	(da Moura et al., 2023)
OQ223310.1	wPip-III	(da Moura et al., 2023)
OQ223309.1	wPip-IV	(da Moura et al., 2023)


I add all of them to a fasta file and  rename them to identify the groups later
```bash
# Label the five canonical group refs
sed -i 's/^>OM885005\.1.*/>wPip-I|OM885005.1/'  wPip-pk1-refs.fasta
sed -i 's/^>OM885007\.1.*/>wPip-II|OM885007.1/' wPip-pk1-refs.fasta
sed -i 's/^>OM885006\.1.*/>wPip-III|OM885006.1/' wPip-pk1-refs.fasta
sed -i 's/^>OM885008\.1.*/>wPip-IV|OM885008.1/'  wPip-pk1-refs.fasta
sed -i 's/^>OM885009\.1.*/>wPip-V|OM885009.1/'   wPip-pk1-refs.fasta
sed -i 's/^>OQ223309\.1.*/>wPip-IV|OQ223309.1/' wPip-pk1-refs.fasta
sed -i 's/^>OQ223310\.1.*/>wPip-III|OQ223310.1/' wPip-pk1-refs.fasta
sed -i 's/^>OQ223315\.1.*/>wPip-II|OQ223315.1/' wPip-pk1-refs.fasta
sed -i 's/^>LC106155\.1.*/>wPip-I|LC106155.1/' wPip-pk1-refs.fasta

```
Then I use [blast-wPip-def.sh](../scripts/blast-wPip-def.sh)
```

We found all the samples had 3 copies of pk1 (as they should being wPip) and all of them were identical to one of the references from wPipI. We then cocnluded all our samples were infected bu wPip strains and it was not possible to do a phylogenetic reconstruction.